---
layout: page
title: Research
---

## Capablities

Dr. Phillip J. Wolfram is a computational fluid dynamist in the Theoretical
division Fluid Dynamics and Solid Mechanics group at Los Alamos National
Laboratory with expertise in numerical methods and modeling of small- and
large-scale environmental flows, ranging from the river junction scale to the
global ocean. His work has centered on understanding mixing processes within
complex flows, from small-scale secondary flows in channel networks in the
Sacramento San Joaquin Delta to large-scale  geostrophic turbulence in idealized Northern
Atlantic and Southern Ocean flows.

He uses fluid mechanics, algorithms,
high-performance computing, software engineering, and advanced visualization
techniques to increase knowledge of computation, analysis, and the physics of
complex, eddy-driven mixing processes, with emphasis on coastal and climate
applications. He is an expert in development and application of unstructured
computational fluid dynamics, especially nonhydrostatic processes and in-situ
Lagrangian particle tracking techniques.  His work uses multiple methods to
understand physical phenomena, including observations, computational physics,
and analysis. He is currently working on projects related to high-performance
particle tracking and analysis, biogeochemical climate modeling, and ocean and
coastal modeling and science.

## Projects

### Multiresolution, Multiscale Modeling for Scalable Macroalgae Production -- ARPA-E MARINER (Los Alamos project and technical lead; project PI [Zhaoqing Yang](https://marine.pnnl.gov/staff/staff_info.asp?staff_num=971))

This multidisciplinary team provides a multiscale and multimodel simulation
capability to evaluate and optimize the design of macroalgae farming for
biofuels.
Extension of MPAS-O biogeochemistry capabilities for regional refinement allows
simulation of the key oceanographic and biogeochemical conditions needed for
macroalgae farming for biofuels.
Data analysis and synthesis yield a mariculture farmer almanac for use in simulation
and field-scale planning for macroalgae farming will aid technological
development in this new industry.

### Adaptation Science for Complex Natural-Engineered Systems -- LDRD DR (MPAS-O techincal lead; Natural System lead [Joel Rowland](http://www.lanl.gov/expertise/profiles/view/joel-rowland); project PI [Donatella Pasqualini](http://public.lanl.gov/dp/Home.html))

Impacts of climate change on the coasts will have severe infrastructure impacts
that are presently impossible to predict for proactive planning, e.g., due to
inundation by hurricanes.  Development of coastal processes in MPAS-O is needed
to simulate these effects of climate change for an accurate natural system
simulation of ecogeomorphic, decadal-scale shoreline evolution for inundation
analysis within infrastructure adapation studies under secular (drought) and
episodic (extreme events like hurricanes) climate changes.

### Energy Exascale Earth System Model -- DOE Office of Science BER (Coastal waves next generation development lead; Los Alamos lead [Steve Price](http://public.lanl.gov/sprice/))

[E3SM](https://climatemodeling.science.energy.gov/projects/energy-exascale-earth-system-model)
is the primier climate modeling capability of the DOE, which includes coupled
process-based representations of the global earth system with multiscale,
multiphysics capabilities facilitiating regional climate simulation.  In
particular, development and evaluation of algorithms in the [Model for
Prediction Across Scales Ocean](https://mpas-dev.github.io/ocean/ocean.html)
(MPAS-O) can improve the coupled climate system, particularly for crysosphere
and water cycle science questions, e.g., sea level rise impacts and coupled
ocean-ice interactions.  In-situ analysis techniques such as [LIGHT]({{
site.url }}/light) and
[MPAS-Analysis](https://github.com/MPAS-Dev/MPAS-Analysis/) further
understanding of flows within the ocean and its context within the broader
coupled climate system.  Development of new capabilities for inclusion
within E3SM, e.g., wave modeling, improves the global ocean flow as well as
opens the door for coastal ocean simulation.

---
link-citations: true
nocite: |
  @cao2019analysis, @zhang2019intercomparison, @hoch2019quality
  @golaz2019doe, @petersen2019evaluation, @samsel2019colormapping, @dutta2019leveraging, @johnson2019artifact,
  @vansebille2016lagrangian, @gospodnetic2018ocean, @coffrin2019isti,
  @samsel2017intuitive,
  @wolfram2017computing, @wolfram2017eddymeanflow, @ringler2016thickness, @samsel2017intuitive,
  @evans2017acme,
  @wolfram2016modeling, @wolfram2016longstanding,
  @wolfram2015diagnosing,
  @gelichauf2014Dispersion,
  @wolfram2013secondary,
  @wolfram2013mitigating,
  @lorenz2012ancient,
  @lorenz2012water,
  @lorenz2011valley,
  @wolfram2008community,
  @wolfram2007solution,
  @lorenz2007millstones,
  @lorenz2007arches
...

## [Peer-reviewed Publications](https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=LbNn4wIAAAAJ&hl=en)
